HitSmart: Optimizing Nutrition 🥑🥩

For enhanced Brain Health, Energy, Mental Clarity, recovery and Athletic Performance

The significant dietary shifts over the past centuries, especially in the last 50 years, have distanced us from the nutritional practices of our ancestors. This mismatch between our modern diet and our body’s natural needs has led to widespread health issues.
Proper nutrition is the cornerstone of optimal brain health, rapid recovery, and peak athletic performance—especially vital in the demanding world of combat sports.
Your diet plays a pivotal role in managing inflammation, a key factor in many chronic health issues. Modern Western diets, laden with processed foods, have been shown to significantly increase inflammation, hindering both recovery and overall health.
It’s well-documented that a diet high in processed foods, both before and after a traumatic brain injury, can significantly hinder recovery.
 This guide will teach you how to optimize your diet for peak performance, brain health, and overall health. 

Our goal with this diet is to focus on foods that support brain function and healing while eliminating those that cause inflammation and other harmful effects. Adopting this approach can also contribute to better overall well-being as input = output.

After a concussion, proper nutrition is especially important, we need it to...
Break the cycle of neuroinflammation
Restore balance of nervous system
Promote a healthy gut-brain relationship and optimal gut function
Promote brain blood flow
Support mitochondrial function
Transforming Your Diet

Cutting the unhealthy
Eliminate ultra-processed foods: refined sugars, and refined carbs (e.g. candy, donuts...)
Reduce gluten: white bread, pasta, white rice, cookies...
Avoid ultra-processed, deep-fried, and charred meats (e.g. charred BBQ ribs, deep-fried chicken)
Avoid alcohol, energy drinks, pop/soda, sugary drinks (these dehydrate you amongst other bad effects)
Eliminate unhealthy oils: vegetable oil, corn oil, safflower oil, margarine, canola oil, soy oil, and peanut oil

Replacing with healthy

Hydration 
3.5-4L of water daily (ideally spring water)
Balanced meals 
Good protein sources: wild fish, free range chicken/turkey, beans, beef, lamb
Whenever possible, choose local, organic, antibiotic-free, and free-range meats
Non-processed and low glycemic carbs: sweet potato, quinoa, brown rice, beets, zucchini
Ensure that 50% of your plate is filled with a variety of vegetables—the more diverse, the better

More fruits and vegetables – full of antioxidants 
Incorporate a variety of colorful plants, such as blueberries, strawberries, and broccoli, to obtain a diverse range of antioxidant properties.
More healthy fats 
Wild fish 
Include good fats such as walnuts, almonds, ground flaxseeds, chia seeds, hemp seeds, grass-fed butter, high-quality olive oil, coconut oil, avocado oil, and MCT oil.
Avoid ultra-processed nuts, meats, and dairy, as well as the deep-fried versions of the foods listed above

Additional helpers
Healthy spices like turmeric and ginger
Green tea, sencha or matcha 
Herbal teas in general are great
Good quality herbal teas are a healthier alternative for coffee and the other beverages we eliminated above
Caloric Restriction and Fasting
Both caloric restriction and fasting have been shown to improve brain health and enhance cognitive function.

There are different ways one can practice fasting or caloric restriction:

(Typically when you fast, you don’t consume anything other than water)

Can fast 1 day a week 
Can fast 2-3 days, once a month
Can intermittent fast (eating only in a time window like 12pm-6pm)
Alternatively, you can simply reduce your overall calorie intake by ~ 30%, which will be particularly beneficial for those who are already overeating
Fasting isn’t one-size-fits-all; find a method that fits your lifestyle and listen to your body’s signals


Disclaimer:
This guide is intended for educational purposes only and should not be considered a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Always consult with your healthcare provider before making any changes to your diet, beginning a new exercise program, or starting any supplementation regimen. The information provided here is meant to support your understanding of health and nutrition but does not establish a doctor-patient relationship. Do not disregard professional medical advice or delay seeking it based on the information found in this guide. The practices and recommendations outlined here should be undertaken with the guidance and approval of your healthcare provider, especially if you have pre-existing health conditions. Always ensure that any new health practices, such as fasting or caloric restriction, are appropriate for your specific needs and circumstances by consulting with a qualified healthcare professional.

