HitSmart: Soothing the Nervous System, ​​Balancing the Effects of Stress and Anxiety, and Increasing Stress Tolerance ☯️

We can pick up unnecessary amounts of stress and anxiety from excessive sympathetic nervous system activity. This can be caused by Autonomic Dysfunction (Dysautonomia) which can stem from a concussion, sparring, or a hectic high-stress lifestyle.

sympathetic nervous system?

Your body has two modes: it likes to be in "fight or flight" and "rest and digest" because there are 2 competing nervous systems in your body: the sympathetic (fight or flight) and parasympathetic (rest and digest).



You typically find yourself in either rest and digest mode (e.g. when you feel a bit tired after a big meal) or fight or flight mode (e.g. when you feel active and alert while exercising or sparring).  
Excess sympathetic activity suppresses the parasympathetic activity  
Parasympathetic nervous system is responsible for winding you down for the rest, repair, and anti-inflammatory processes. While the sympathetic nervous system is in charge of winding you up into fight or flight mode

Digestive issues from stress?

The sympathetic nervous system (SNS) directs the body's resources (like blood flow) away from what's not essential for being active and alert.

So when you’re in fight or flight mode, your body isn’t digesting as well because it's not an essential function in that state(From an evolutionary perspective, your ancestors were in fight or flight mode when hunting, and in rest and digest mode after a feast).

So when you have excessive stress and anxiety from excessive SNS activity, you might get digestive issues as well

Vagus Nerve

The main nerve of the parasympathetic nervous system (PNS), is called the vagus nerve. It connects your brain to your internal organs. The vagus nerve makes up about 75% of the parasympathetic system’s fibers





The function of your vagus nerve is described as "vagal tone"

Well-functioning vagus nerve = high vagal tone
Poorly-functioning vagus nerve  = low vagal tone



Higher vagal tone can:
Lower anxiety 
Lower blood pressure 
Improve stress resilience 
Improve digestion and mood 
Improve blood sugar regulation 
Reduce risk of stroke and cardiovascular disease
And more

How can you raise your vagal tone and reduce stress and anxiety


Deep, slow breathing and meditation  
5 minutes of silent meditation with deep breathing. Focus on expanding and breathing deep into your belly and keeping your upper chest very still. Ideally, should be a slow inhale (3 sec), hold (1 sec), slow exhale (3 sec)
OR deep inhale for 3 seconds, slow exhale for 15 seconds. Incorporate this throughout the day (e.g. after waking up, before a meeting, to wind down for bed…)

Cold water exposure: cold exposure can help decrease sympathetic and increase parasympathetic
You can work your way up as so:
a) Start with splashing cold water on your face
b) End your shower with 10 sec of cold water
c) Hot-cold showers – alternate one minute sec hot, 10-20 sec cold. Do 3-4 cycles and end in cold

Long steady walks calm the nervous system. I’ve found getting into nature helps as well. Can also practice mindful walking where you pay close attention to every step (e.g. how you place and lift your foot on each step)

Earthing / Grounding – walking on grass, sand, or dirt with bare feet daily for 10 minutes

Gargling – powerful vagus stimulator. Gargle water or salt water for 5 minutes in the morning and/or before bed. Needs to be a deeper gargle for optimal stimulation 

Using your voice – laugh daily because it stimulates the diaphragm and the vagus nerve. Same for singing and chanting (like when the yogis say “ooooommm…”)

Supplements I take to wind down

Magnesium
Essential mineral that supports enzyme function for vital chemical reactions in the body.
Contributes to protein synthesis, strong bone health, and regulation of blood pressure and blood sugar levels.
Supports proper muscle and nerve function.
Aids digestion and can prevent constipation by relaxing gastrointestinal muscles.
Acts as a natural relaxant, helping to alleviate stress and anxiety.
Can improve sleep quality when taken 1-2 hours before bed, leading to deeper, more restorative rest.

L-theanine
Naturally occurring amino acid found in green tea.
Known for its calming and relaxing effects on the mind and body.
Structurally similar to the neurotransmitters glutamate and GABA, which regulate brain function.
May promote relaxation and reduce stress and anxiety.
Can enhance focus, attention, and support overall sleep quality.


Disclaimer: The information provided in this guide is for educational purposes only and is not intended as a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. The recommendations for supplements and activities to calm the nervous system and stimulate the vagus nerve are based on personal experience and general research. Please consult with a healthcare professional before starting any new supplement regimen or practice, especially if you have any underlying health conditions.
